TypeScript support in core (#4662)
plone/volto: docs/source/upgrade-guide/index.md

Razzle has been upgraded to version `4.2.18`.
It is recommended that you update your project's dependency on Razzle to this version in order to avoid duplication.

### TypeScript support in Volto

```{versionadded} 17.0.0-alpha.22

> We have now full support of TypeScript in Volto core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We added full support of TypeScript in Volto core.
```

No existing code has been migrated.

> You still have the freedom to develop using JavaScript, it's your choice if you want to do it in TypeScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You still have the freedom to develop using JavaScript.
It's your choice whether you want to do it in TypeScript.
```

In the past, you could add TypeScript support for Volto add-ons.

> It's also available for projects too now if you upgrade dependencies (see next section).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also available for projects now, if you upgrade dependencies (see next section).
```

```

> You should update your projects if you want to support TypeScript in your projects as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to support TypeScript in your projects, you should update your projects.
```

> Changes in your `package.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make the following changes in your {file}`package.json`:
```

```diff
"devDependencies": {
+     "@plone/scripts": ^3.0.0,
+     "@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin": "5.57.1",
+     "@typescript-eslint/parser": "5.57.1",
+     "stylelint-prettier": "1.1.2",
+     "ts-jest": "^26.4.2",
+     "ts-loader": "9.4.2",
+     "typescript": "5.1.6"
}
```

### Upgrade ESlint and use `@babel/eslint-parser`

ESlint uses a library to parse the language under analysis.
The one used was long deprecated and didn't supported both TypeScript and JavaScript.
We upgraded the ESlint parser to use `@babel/eslint-parser`.

> This means that could be that when you upgrade your projects, some new violations appear in your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means when you upgrade your project, some new violations may appear.
```

Razzle has been upgraded to version `4.2.18`.
It is recommended that you update your project's dependency on Razzle to this version in order to avoid duplication.

### TypeScript support in Volto

```{versionadded} 17.0.0-alpha.22
We added full support of TypeScript in Volto core.
No existing code has been migrated.
You still have the freedom to develop using JavaScript.
It's your choice whether you want to do it in TypeScript.
In the past, you could add TypeScript support for Volto add-ons.
It's also available for projects now, if you upgrade dependencies (see next section).

> ```

Reviewer: Let's simplify this block, moving most content outside of the block.

````suggestion
```{versionadded} 17.0.0-alpha.22
```

We added full support of TypeScript in Volto core.

No existing code has been migrated.
You may write code in either JavaScript or TypeScript.
The choice is yours.

Previously developers had the option to support TypeScript only in their Volto add-ons.
Now it's available in Volto projects, as long as you upgrade your project dependencies.
````

> If you want to support TypeScript in your projects, you should update your projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support TypeScript in your projects, you must update your project as follows.
```

> Make the following changes in your {file}`package.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit your {file}`package.json`:
```

```diff
-    "lint": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 'src/**/*.{js,jsx}'",
-    "lint:fix": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 --fix 'src/**/*.{js,jsx}'",
-    "lint:ci": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 -f checkstyle 'src/**/*.{js,jsx}' > eslint.xml",
+    "lint": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 'src/**/*.{js,jsx,ts,tsx,json}'",
+    "lint:fix": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --fix 'src/**/*.{js,jsx,ts,tsx,json}'",
+    "lint:ci": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 -f checkstyle 'src/**/*.{js,jsx,ts,tsx,json}' > eslint.xml",
```

```diff
"devDependencies": {
+     "@plone/scripts": ^3.0.0,
+     "@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin": "6.7.0",
+     "@typescript-eslint/parser": "6.7.0",
+     "stylelint-prettier": "1.1.2",
+     "ts-jest": "^26.4.2",
+     "ts-loader": "9.4.4",
+     "typescript": "5.2.2"
}
```

```{note}

> Could be that after this, you experience hoisting problems and some packages can't be found on start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After making this change, you might experience hoisting problems and some packages can't be found on start.
```

In that case, make sure you reset your `yarn.lock` by deleting it and start with a clean environment.
```

> In case that you want to use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a `tsconfig.json` file in it, and remove the existing `jsconfig.json`. You can use the one provided by de generator as template, or use your own:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a TypeScript configuration file {file}`tsconfig.json`, and remove the existing file {file}`jsconfig.json`.
You can use the one provided by the generator as a template, or use your own:
```

> In case that you want to use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a `tsconfig.json` file in it, and remove the existing `jsconfig.json`. You can use the one provided by de generator as template, or use your own:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case that you want to use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a `tsconfig.json` file in it, and remove the existing `jsconfig.json`. You can use the one provided by the generator as template, or use your own:
```

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ESNext",
    "lib": ["DOM", "DOM.Iterable", "ESNext"],
    "module": "commonjs",
    "allowJs": true,
    "skipLibCheck": true,
    "esModuleInterop": true,
    "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true,

>     "strict": false,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "strict": true,
```

    "forceConsistentCasingInFileNames": true,
    "moduleResolution": "Node",
    "resolveJsonModule": true,
    "isolatedModules": true,
    "noEmit": true,
    "jsx": "react-jsx",
    "paths": {},
    "baseUrl": "src"
  },
  "include": ["src"],
  "exclude": [
    "node_modules",
    "build",
    "public",
    "coverage",
    "src/**/*.test.{js,jsx,ts,tsx}",
    "src/**/*.spec.{js,jsx,ts,tsx}",
    "src/**/*.stories.{js,jsx,ts,tsx}"
  ]
}
```

> If you are using `mrs-developer` in your project, update the command in `Makefile`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use `mrs-developer` in your project, update the command in {file}`Makefile`:
```

```diff
--- a/Makefile
+++ b/Makefile

> @@ -59,7 +59,8 @@ preinstall: ## Preinstall task, checks if missdev (mrs-developer) is present and

Reviewer: "and" ...what else? Don't leave me hanging!

It should match the Makefile.

```suggestion
preinstall: ## Preinstall task, checks if missdev (mrs-developer) is present and runs it
```

 .PHONY: develop
 develop: ## Runs missdev in the local project (mrs.developer.json should be present)
-       npx -p mrs-developer missdev --config=jsconfig.json --output=addons --fetch-https
+       if [ -f $$(pwd)/jsconfig.json ]; then npx -p mrs-developer missdev --config=jsconfig.json --output=addons --fetch-https; fi
+       if [ ! -f $$(pwd)/jsconfig.json ]; then npx -p mrs-developer missdev --output=addons --fetch-https; fi
```

````{note}

> Do not forget to run `mrs-developer` after doing it, so the configuration gets in the right place (`tsconfig.json`) now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After editing your {file}`Makefile`, run `mrs-developer` with the following command, so the configuration gets in the right place ({file}`tsconfig.json`).
```

> Run

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```shell
make develop
```
````

### Upgrade ESlint and use `@babel/eslint-parser`

> ESlint uses a library to parse the language under analysis.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```{versionchanged} 17.0.0-alpha.22
```
ESlint uses a library to parse the language under analysis.
````
